Lenia and Expanded Universe

Bert Wang-Chak Chan

Hong Kong
albert.chak@gmail.com

Abstract 2. Calculate weighted sums of A with a predefined array
(kernel K), which is equivalent to calculate the convo-

We report experimental extensions of Lenia, a continuous lution K ∗A; the kernel K has radius R, forming a ring
cellular automata family capable of producing lifelike self- or multiple concentric rings (parameter β = list of peak
organizing autonomous patterns. The rule of Lenia was gen-
eralized into higher dimensions, multiple kernels, and multi- value of each ring).
ple channels. The final architecture approaches what can be
seen as a recurrent convolutional neural network. Using semi- 3. Apply a growth mapping function G to the weighted
automatic search e.g. genetic algorithm, we discovered new sums; the growth mapping G is any unimodal function
phenomena like polyhedral symmetries, individuality, self- (parameters µ = growth center, σ = growth width).
replication, emission, growth by ingestion, and saw the emer-
gence of “virtual eukaryotes” that possess internal division of 4. Add a small portion dt of the values back to the array A.
labor and type differentiation. We discuss the results in the
contexts of biology, artificial life, and artificial intelligence. 5. Finally clip the states of A to between 0 and 1.

6. Repeat steps 2-5 for each time-step.
Introduction In formula:

The study of cellular automata (CA) is one of the major 1
At+dt

branches in artificial life and complex systems research. = [At + dt G(K ∗At)]0 (1)
CAs were invented by John von Neumann and Stanislaw
Ulam (Von Neumann, 1951; Ulam, 1962), then popularized (a)

A K G

by John H. Conway’s Game of Life (GoL) (Gardner, 1970) N 1
x

and Stephen Wolfram’s elementary cellular automata (ECA) 0

(Wolfram, 1983). On the one hand, research on CAs led to -1

proofs of Turing completeness and therefore the capability
(b) A K

for universal computation in CAs, e.g. GoL and ECA Rule
N G

110 (Rendell, 2002; Cook, 2004). On the other hand, CAs 1

were utilized to model complex systems, generate patterns, x
0

and produce computer art. -1

One line of investigation involves attempts to construct
long-range or continuous CAs, search for and study self- Figure 1: Rules of GoL and Lenia. (a) In GoL, a site x in the
organizing autonomous patterns, or solitons. These attempts world A has 8 surrounding sites as its Moore neighborhood
include CAPOW (Rucker, 1999), Larger-than-Life (Evans,

N . Calculate the weighted sum of N with kernel K (all
2001), RealLife (Pivato, 2007), SmoothLife (Rafler, 2011a), weights 1), apply a mapping function G (survival = 0, birth
Lenia (Chan, 2019), and extended Lenia discussed in this = +1, death = -1), add the value back to the site x and clip
paper. They generalize GoL into continuous space using ar- it to 0 or 1, repeat. (b) In Lenia, the rule is similar, but
bitrary long range neighborhoods, into continuous time us- generalized to the continuous domain - infinitesimal sites x
ing arbitrary small incremental updates, and into continuous with real values, circular neighborhood N , ring-like kernel
states using real numbers.

K, smooth mappingG, and incremental update by factor dt.
The algorithm of Lenia is as follows (see Figure 1).

1. Take a 2D array (world A) of real values between 0 and In such a continuous CA system, many self-organizing,
1, initialize with an initial pattern A0. autonomous solitons were discovered with diverse structures

arXiv:2005.03742v1  [nlin.CG]  7 May 2020



and behaviors. Structures include symmetries like bilateral, Rule Extensions
radial and rotational symmetries, linear polymerized long- Higher dimensions The 2D arrays in Lenia were up-
chains, and irregular structures. Behaviors include regular graded to 3 or higher dimensions, and the algorithms used
modes of locomotion like stationary, directional, rotating, in the software were subsequently generalized to deal with
gyrating, and irregular behaviors like chaotic movements, multidimensional arrays. The number of dimensions is de-
metamorphosis (shape-shifting), and particle collisions. noted as d. Experiments of 3D Lenia have been carried out

The current on-going work is aimed to answer the follow- before but without success in finding interesting patterns.
ing open questions raised in the original Lenia paper (Chan, With the utilization of GPU parallel computing and better
2019): searching algorithms, stable solitons have been found.

9. Do self-replicating and pattern-emitting lifeforms exist in
Lenia? Multiple kernels The original Lenia involves one kernel

K with radius R, one growth mapping G, and one incre-
10. Do lifeforms exist in other variants of Lenia (e.g. 3D)? ment factor dt. Now multiply the rule with multiple ker-

We answer “Yes” to both questions. By exploring vari- nels Kk, each with relative radius rkR, and corresponding
ants and generalizations of Lenia, we discovered new types growth mapping Gk. Weighted average of the results by
of solitons with a wide range of unseen behaviors includ- factors hk/h (h is the sum of hk) is taken. The number
ing self-replication and pattern emission. The current work of kernels is denoted as nk. This extension was inspired by
also aims towards answering Lenia’s relationship with Tur- MNCA (Rampe, 2018b,a) that produces highly irregular and
ing completeness (question 6), open-ended evolution (ques- dynamic patterns.
tion 7), and other implications in artificial life and artificial
intelligence. Multiple channels Lenia and most CAs have only one

world array A, so we experimented with “parallel worlds”
Related Works or multiple channels Ai. In addition to the kernels feed-

SmoothLife (Rafler, 2011a), an earlier independent discov- ing back to each channel, there are also cross-channel ker-
ery similar to Lenia, was the first to report solitons (called nels for the channels to interact with each other. Denote the
“smooth gliders”) in a continuous 2D CA. number of channels as c, the number of self-interacting ker-

Extensions to Lenia rules were inspired by numerous nels per channel as ks, and the number of cross-channel ker-
works about CAs in the literature and in code repositories. nels per channel pair as kx, then the total number of kernels
There were various attempts in taking existing 2D CAs and nk = ksc+kxc(c−1). This was inspired by multi-layer CA
other artificial life systems into higher dimensions (Bays, (Sherrill, 2019) and Neural CA (Mordvintsev et al., 2020).
1987; Imai et al., 2010; Rafler, 2011b; Sayama, 2012; Hut- Combinations The above extensions (and potentially oth-
ton, 2012). Duplication of components in existing CA rules ers) can be further combined to produce unique results, e.g.
were demonstrated to produce very different dynamics, e.g. 3D 3-channel 3-self-kernel. The original Lenia becomes a
Multiple Neighborhoods CA (MNCA) (Rampe, 2018b,a), special case, i.e. 2D 1-channel 1-kernel Lenia.
multiple layer CA “Conway’s Ecosystem” (Sherrill, 2019). The algorithm of extended Lenia is summarized as fol-
There were also efforts to blur the boundary between CA lows (see Figure 2).
and neural networks and brought amazing breakthroughs,
e.g. Neural CA (Mordvintsev et al., 2020). 1. Create multiple channels of world Ai(i = 1 . . . c), each

The results of the current work can be compared with channel a d-dimensional array of real values between 0
other artificial life models, especially particle systems and 1; initialize each channel with initial pattern A0

i .
with multiple species of particles, e.g. Swarm Chemistry
(Sayama, 2009), Primordial Particle Systems (Schmickl 2. Define multiple d-dimensional arrays of kernels Kk(k =
et al., 2016), Clusters (Ventrella, 2017), developed from the 1 . . . nk), each with relative radius rkR, parameter βk,
pioneering Boids (Reynolds, 1987). These models are able source channel i, destination channel j, and correspond-
to generate cell-like structures of various styles. ing growth mapping Gk with parameters µk and σk.

Methods 3. For each kernel Kk, calculate weighted sums with its
Inspired by the related works, we experimented with 3 major source channel Ai, i.e. convolution Kk ∗Ai.
extensions to the original Lenia, namely higher dimensions, 4. Apply growth mapping Gk to the weighted sums.
multiple kernels, multiple channels, and any combinations
thereof. We updated the existing open-source software, de- 5. Add a small relative portion dt · hk/h of the values to
signed semi-automatic algorithms to search for new patterns destination channel Aj .
and solitons, and performed qualitative analysis on the re-
sults. 6. Repeat steps 3-5 for every kernel Kk.



7. Finally clip the states of each channel Ai to between 0 Consider a moderately complex rule of 3D 3-channel 3-
and 1. self-kernel, with all kernels composed of 3 concentric rings,

and a soliton size of 20 × 20 × 20 sites. In this case, the
8. Repeat steps 3-7 for each time-step. genotype is in the form (r, h, β3, µ, σ)15, that is 105 param-

In formula: eter values, and the phenotype consists of 3 channels of 3-

[ ∑ ] dimensional arrays, amounting to 24000 site values.
1

At+dt
j = At

j + dt hk t
i,k h Gk(Kk ∗Ai) (2)

0 Search Algorithms
We want to search for interesting patterns or solitons given

(a) the new rules. However, the rules create higher degrees of
K G dt

Σ freedom, hence summon the curse of dimensionality. The
t t+dt size of the search space now grows exponentially, manual

A A

parameter search and pattern manipulations become diffi-
(b)

cult if not impossible. We employed several semi-automatic
K G dt search algorithms with an interactive user interface to tackle

Σ this problem and help exploring the search space.
t t+dt

A A The algorithms pick genotypes and phenotypes according
(c) to some criteria in the search space, and automatically filter

Kk Gk dt ⋅ hk/h
them by survival, i.e. to check that the solitons will not come

Σ to vanish or occupy the whole grid after running the CA for a
t t+dt

A A period of time. The results are then selected by the human-
in-loop for novelty, visual appeal, or prospects for further
study, and used in further rounds of semi-automatic search.

(d)

K Global search The algorithm generates random genotypes
k Gk dt ⋅ hkj/h

and phenotypes from the global search space. The ranges
of random values can be tuned to narrow down the search.

Σ

Once interesting patterns or solitons are found, they can be
Σ fed to other algorithms.
Σ

t t+dt Depth-first search Starting with an initial soliton, the al-
Ai Aj gorithm adds small random deviations to one or all values

in its genotype, and tests if the phenotype survives. If it
does, record the survived phenotype, repeat the process us-
ing this new genotype and phenotype as the starting point.
This method allows deeper explorations of the search space.

Figure 2: Extended Lenia rules. (a) Original 2D Lenia:
world A at time t passes through convolution with kernel K, Breadth-first search This algorithm is similar to depth-
growth mapping G, and incremental update Σ to next time first search, but using the initial genotype and phenotype as
step t + dt. (b) Higher dimensions with d-dimensional ar- the starting point in every search. This method is able to
rays. (c) Multiple kernels, where multiple Kk and Gk feed explore variations of one particular interesting soliton.
into Σ by factors hk. (d) Multiple channels, where sepa-
rate channels of world Ai pass through Kk and Gk, feed Genetic algorithm First set an fitness function and opti-
into multiple Σ that update channel Aj . The architecture mization goal (e.g. faster moving speed, higher mass oscil-
approaches a recurrent convolutional neural network. lation). Starting from an initial soliton in a pool of samples,

the genetic algorithm aggregates the pool using two genetic
operators, (1) mutation: pick a random sample from the pool

Genotypes, Phenotypes, and Search Space and randomly mutate its genotype; (2) recombination: pick
The search space of extended Lenia consists of all possible two random samples, create a new sample by randomly mix-
genotypes and phenotypes. A genotype here is a particu- ing their channels and associated parameters. After check-
lar combination of rule parameter values, a phenotype is a ing for survival, calculate the fitness value of the new sam-
particular configuration of the world arrays. A pattern (or a ple, add it to the pool, and sort the pool by fitness. Finally
soliton) is jointly specified by its genotype and phenotype. the samples with top fitnesses are recorded as results.



1. 2. 3. 4. 1. 2. 3. 4.

(a) Original Lenia: 1. Orbium; 2. Orbium individuals in elastic (e) Higher dimensions Lenia: 1. moving sphere; 2. rotating sphere
collision; 3. long-chain Pentaptera; 4. rotating Asterium with 5- with bubbles in trigonal bipyramidal arrangement; 3. pulsating
fold rotational symmetry. sphere with dots; 4. pulsating 4D hypersphere, showing a 3D slice.

(b) Multi-kernel Lenia: 1. the first replicator discovered; 2. right (f) 3D multi-kernel Lenia: 1. moving “Snake” and static “food
after its self-replication; 3. solitons in parallel pair; 4. solitons in dots”; 2. Snake grows while ingesting 3 dots (now spans across
elastic collision, repulsive forces hinted by electricity-like lines. the screen); 3-4. a mutant of Snake performing elegant dance.

(c) Multi-channel Lenial: 1. aggregated soliton with cell-like struc- (g) Exponential growth: 1-3. replicator under three rounds of bi-
tures; 2. right after its self-replication; 3. sea of emitted particles; nary fission, repulsive forces visible as negative spheres; 4. Off-
4. dendrite-like emissions from replicating solitons. springs migrate out for further replication.

(d) “Aquarium” phenotypes: 1-3. (left to right) gyrating, slightly (h) 3D multi-channel Lenia: 1. tetrapod; 2. moving soliton with
oblique; stationary, parallel pair; slow-moving, parallel slow- red nucleus and green pseudopods; 3. double helix pattern; 4. rain-
moving; 4. a few solitons in a stable, dynamic formation. bow ball.

Figure 3: Sample solitons. Scale bar at lower right represents kernel radius R.

Software Results
With the help of semi-automatic algorithms, we discovered

The interactive software for Lenia, now open source in a number of new structures and behaviors in the extended
GitHub, was updated with the above rule extensions and rules. Unlike the original Lenia, where most solitons are
search algorithms. well defined and moderately symmetric, solitons found in

For visualization of higher dimensions, the 3D world is the extended rules either possess even higher symmetries
flattened to 2D using a depth map, which can show the inter- (in higher dimensions), or become highly chaotic yet highly
nal structures of 3D objects with transparency. For dimen- self-organized and persistent (with multiple kernels or chan-
sions higher than 3, one 3D slice of the array is displayed. nels). See Figure 3 for samples (include the original Lenia

The default color palette used for single-channel visual- for reference).
ization was changed from Jet to Turbo (Mikhailov, 2019) for
better perceptual uniformity. For higher dimensions, Paul Rule Specific Observations
Tol’s Rainbow palette (Tol, 2018) is recommended to show Higher dimensions In higher dimensions, stable solitons
3D internal structures. For multiple channels, the first three are hard to find, and the found ones are highly stable. Their
channels are displayed in red, green and blue (RGB). external shapes are almost always spherical, and their inter-



nal structures can be complex and highly symmetrical. In (a) (b)

Survival Evaporation Explosion Metamorphosis Emission Absorption
some cases, bubbles (inner voids) are arranged as vertices of
Platonic solids or regular polyhedra, e.g. tetrahedron, octa- A A A A A A

B

hedron, triangular bipyramid, and icosahedron. Most soli-
tons are motionless, a few of them are oscillating, rotating,

A ✕ B B
or directional moving. A A

Higher dimensional structures are not too chaotic even (c) Autocatalytic (d)

with multi-kernel or multi-channel extensions, which are Replication replication Annihilation Detonation

supposed to introduce a lot of instability. A A A A B A B

Multiple kernels As demonstrated by MNCA, multiple
kernels could introduce instability and interesting dynam- A A A A A ✕

ics into the complex system. Overall chaoticity of the CA
increases, but given the right parameters, the system can (e) (f)

De ection Conversion Fusion Fission

achieve even higher degrees of self-organization and persis-
A B A B A B A B

tence. There we discovered new or more common behaviors
- individuality, self-replication, emission, growth, etc.

Multiple channels In a multi-channel world, each channel A B A C A B A B

develops patterns according to its own rule, and at the same (g) Ingestion (h)

time, these patterns co-develop and influence each other Elongation Contraction (growth) Complex reaction

through channel-channel interactions. Different channels of A A A A A A A A B C
B

a soliton could exhibit something like a division of labor,
e.g. some channels act as outer flexible shells (membranes),
some form central masses (nuclei), together they form cell- A A A A A

A A A D E F

like structures. In a special case, a particular type of “Aquar-
ium” genotype could produce an array of phenotypes, come Figure 4: Behaviors and interactions of solitons in extended
with different behaviors and complex interactions. Lenia. Categories: (a) single soliton developments, (b) sim-
Common Phenomena ple reactions, (c) reproduction, (d) mutual destruction, (e)

elastic collisions, (f) inelastic collisions, (g) long-chain re-
We summarize common soliton behaviors and phenomena actions, (h) complex reactions.
that can be seen across rules. Refer to Figure 4 for schematic
illustrations.

Locomotion In the original Lenia, solitons engage in var- In multi-kernel or multi-channel rules, Orbium-like indi-
ious kinds of locomotory behaviors, like stationary, direc- viduality becomes a common phenomenon. Numerous types
tional, rotating, gyrating, oscillating, alternating, drifting, of solitons manage to maintain self-organization upon colli-
and chaotic movements. In extended Lenia, these move- sion, thus are able to involve in complex particle interac-
ments are still observed, but rotation becomes very rare, pos- tions. It is possible that some of their kernels or channels act
sibly because there are fewer cases of rotational symmetry. as repelling forces that separate individuals from each other.
With multi-kernel and multi-channel, chaotic movements
and metamorphosis (shape-shifting) become more prevalent Self-replication An important milestone in the study of
than regular behaviors. Conversely, in 3 or higher dimen- Lenia is the discovery of self-replication. It is conspicuously
sions, solitons become predominantly stationary. missing in the original Lenia, but turns out to be not rare in

extended rules. The mechanism is usually one soliton devel-
Individuality Among the soliton species in the original ops into two partitions of similar structures, each develops
Lenia, only the Orbidae family (out of 18 families) engages into a full soliton, drifts away, and is capable of further di-
in some forms of elastic or inelastic collisions - when two vision. In highly reproductive cases, new individuals can
Orbium individuals collide, they often reflect each other and develop out of debris. In multi-channel rule, self-replication
survive, or occasionally stick together to form a composite is usually initiated by division in one channel, then other
soliton Synorbium. For other species, solitons in collision channels follow suit. Self-replication is closely related to
simply lose self-organization and die out. Thus Orbium pos- individuality - newly replicated parts need to repel and sep-
sesses some kind of individuality, in that each soliton is able arate from each other to complete the process.
to maintain its own boundary or “personal space” and avoid There is also autocatalytic replication. In some cases,
mixing its contents with others. self-replication does not or only seldom happens when the



density of solitons is low. But when the density rises (e.g. duces multiple phenotypes of aggregated solitons, each hav-
from the very slow reproduction), congregation of solitons ing own stable structure and behavior.
will force self-replication to happen, kicks start a wave of The collection may include solitons with directional (rec-
autocatalysis and causes exponential growth. tus), oblique (limus), gyrating (gyrans), stationary (lithos),

Reproducing solitons occupy all available space sooner or slower or faster moving (tardus or tachus), parallel / antipar-
later. But if those solitons also vanish with a death rate not allel pairing (para- / anti-) phenotypes, and possibly more.
far from the birth rate, it may maintain a “healthy” popula- Each of the phenotypes is usually quite stable and well de-
tion of regenerating solitons. fined, but can switch to another phenotype in specific occa-

sions, e.g. upon collision or after self-replication.
Growth by ingestion We found this curious phenomenon This is a desirable emergent property in Lenia, since it en-
only in one setting (the “3D Snake” genotype) of 3D multi- ables heterogeneous soliton-soliton interactions for the first
kernel rule. In the Snake world, there is one type of static time. Complex interactions and reactions, together with self-
spherical solitons, “food dots”, and one type of dynamic he- replication, may lead to higher-level structures and collec-
lical solitons, “snakes”. A snake keeps contracting or ex- tive behaviors, like building up tissue-like megastructures.
tending linearly at one or both ends, giving an illusion of
a moving snake. When its extending end reaches one food
dot, it merges with that “inanimate” dot (ingestion), turns Discussion
it into part of the “living” soliton, and slightly elongates Relations to Biology
(growth). The snake also slightly changes direction towards The original Lenia, and other models like SmoothLife
dots within reach, giving an illusion of the snake pursuing
food. 1 (Rafler, 2011a), have shown that continuous CAs are able to

produce patterns with appearance and dynamics comparable
This growth behavior may be related to the elongation and to real world biology. With more discoveries in extended

contraction of long-chain species (Pterifera) in the original Lenia, we can add more comparisons between artificial life
Lenia. It is probably an exceptional and isolated case, but and biological life.
remarkable that it is even possible to happen.

Emission In GoL, an important category of patterns that Origin of Life The gradual emergence of several impor-
enables universal computation is the “guns” - stationary pat- tant phenomena in Lenia is reminiscent of the origin of life.
terns that emit moving solitons. There are other categories: Cell individuality and self-replication are among the hall-
“puffer trains” (moving emit stationary), “rakes” (moving marks of life on Earth, each has abiotic origins. Individ-
emit moving), and complex tertiary emissions. Pattern emis- uality originated from lipid membranes that were formed
sion is sometimes found in extended Lenia, but is usually spontaneously by hydrophobic molecules in the primordial
irregular and of the “puffer train” type. We aim to find more soup, separate the outside world from an area where specific
regular, reliable emitters in Lenia, especially of the “gun” chemical reactions can occur, and protect such an area from
type, in order to pursue Turing completeness (Berlekamp physical attacks and chemical insults (Haldane, 1929). Self-
et al., 2018), or some kind of analog computation. replication possibly came from the RNA World, where RNA

molecules self-assemble and self-replicate out from amino
Division of labor In multi-kernel and multi-channel rules, acid building blocks (Joyce, 1989).
various channels and kernels engage in different behaviors Division of labor inside eukaryotic cells, i.e. the cells
yet influence each other. As discussed above, some kernels of all animals, plants and fungi, stemmed from endosym-
or channels may form patterns that exert repulsion and de- biosis of more basic lifeforms, i.e. bacteria, archaea, and
fine the scope of the pattern, some may facilitate binary fis- possibly viruses (Mereschkowsky, 1905; Sagan, 1967). Mi-
sion, some engage in pattern emission; some may provide tochondria originated from an ancient unification of α-
stability and some others provide motility. proteobacteria with archaea. The bacteria provided aero-

Dynamic or static patterns from different channels com- bic energy metabolism, and the archaea provided the cy-
bine into an aggregated soliton. For the aggregated soliton toplasm and membrane. Chloroplasts originated from fur-
to survive and prosper, its channels must coordinate and co- ther endosymbiosis with cyanobacteria, equipped algae and
operate with each other. It acts as a single unit, engages in plant cells with photosynthesis. The nuclei of the eukaryotic
diverse complex behaviors, and evolves as a whole. cell may have originated from DNA viruses (Bell, 2001).

These organelles, together with the cell body, perform vari-
Differentiation We found a special range of “Aquarium” ous functions separately and also cooperate closely.
genotypes in multi-channel rule, where one genotype pro- Here in extended Lenia, similar processes of individuality,

1Upon seeing in action, one may be reminded of the “Snake” self-replication, and division of labor have emerged from the
mini-game in Nokia mobile phones, except that the Snake world more and more generalized CA rules. Is it possible that these
here is not pre-programmed and snake control is not provided. processes, and maybe others, are essential in creating more



Lenia Cellular level Molecular level
Site Cell Molecule
Kernel Cell signaling Chemical

reaction
Single-channel Simple multi- Prokaryote, virus

soliton cellular life
Multi-channel Complex multi- Eukaryotic cell

soliton cellular life
Division of labor Organs Organelles (a)
Center Heart / brain Nucleus
Individuality Body, skin Cytoplasm,

membrane
Motility Limb Pseudopod
Emission Signal Cytokine
Differentiation Polymorphism Cell type

Table 1: Comparisons of self-organization levels in Lenia to
biology. (b)

Figure 5: “Virtual eukaryotes” in action. (a) Solitons of
and more complex evolvable systems in both the real world “Aquarium” set similar to Figure 3(d), but with a highly re-
and the virtual world. productive gyrating phenotype, start to reproduce, differen-

tiate, migrate, interact and react with each other. (b) A few
Organization hierarchy If we compare the levels of or- tissue-like colonies gradually formed, akin to what happens
ganization in Lenia to the hierarchy of biological structures in multicellularity.
- from atoms to organisms to ecosystems, we could come up
with more than one interpretations (Table 1).

The straightforward take, as implied in the name “cellular notypes. The kinds of division of labor observed include:
automata”, is to interpret a site in CA as a biological “cell”
(or a “concentration of cells” in continuous CAs). A neigh- • Some channels form a pattern like a “nucleus”, usually at
borhood or kernel would be something like a cell signaling the center of an entity. Other channels develop patterns
pathway, affecting surrounding cells with a certain effect. In around the nucleus. Whenever the nucleus moves, self-
this analogy, single-channel solitons are like simple multi- replicates, or dies out, other channels usually follow suit.
cellular organisms without organs (e.g. sponges, jellyfish, • Some channels form “cytoplasm” or “membrane” that de-
fungi, kelps, slime molds), and multi-channel solitons are fines a private area around the nucleus, keeps safe dis-
like complex multicellular organisms (e.g. bilaterian ani- tances from other patterns by means of repulsive and at-
mals, higher plants), with division of labor among organs. tractive forces.

In a more interesting interpretation, a site can be thought
of as a “molecule” (or a “concentration of molecules” in • Some channels may form movable parts like “pseu-
continuous case). Consequently a kernel would be a type dopods”, direct the movement of whole soliton when the
of molecular force or chemical reaction, influencing sur- pseudopod is at the periphery, or stay stationary when it
rounding molecules according to distance and concentra- is kept inside the cytoplasm.
tion. Single-channel solitons, including those in the original
Lenia, would resemble simple microscopic lifeforms (e.g. • Some channels may form “tails” behind the soliton (per-
bacteria, archaea, viruses), possess self-organization, self- haps not for propulsion).
replication, symmetry, individuality, motility, etc. Multi- • Some channels may emit signal-like small particles like
channel solitons, especially of the “Aquarium” genotypes, “cytokines”, significance uncertain.
would resemble eukaryotic cells, with internal division of la-
bor among organelles, and differentiation among cell types. In this regard, these complex solitons could be dubbed

“virtual eukaryotes” or “virtual stem cells” (Figure 5). They
Virtual cells These multi-channel solitons no longer need are by far the most lifelike patterns in the Lenia family of
different genotypes to realize different behaviors, all they continuous CAs.
need are subtle changes in the division of labor and coordi- Altogether, a community of “virtual eukaryotes” engages
nation of internal parts, express themselves as different phe- in diverse emergent behaviors and complex interactions



thanks to their own high level of self-organization, and it Comparing Lenia and Neural CA Lenia relies on tuning
is not impossible that they will later be shown to produce the parameters of kernels and growth mappings to “train”
another level of emergence and self-organization. the model into generating self-organizing patterns, while the

incremental update part has limited flexibility. Neural CA,
Relations to Other Systems in Artificial Life on the other hand, is fixed in the convolutional kernels and
Particle systems (PS), like Swarm Chemistry (Sayama, activation functions, but heavily parameterized in the fully
2009), Primordial Particle Systems (Schmickl et al., 2016), connected layers. Lenia is aimed at exploring novel patterns,
Clusters (Ventrella, 2017), have multiple species of particles helped by evolutionary, genetic and exploratory algorithms;
engage in intra- and inter-species interactions. They pro- Neural CA is aimed at generating predefined patterns, re-
duce results that are comparable to multi-channel Lenia. The sults are optimized by gradient descent.
particles in PSs self-organize into aggregated patterns (soli- Despite the differences, Lenia and Neural CA do one
tons), build cell-like structures like cytoplasms, membranes thing in common - exploit the self-organizing, emergence-
and nuclei, and engage in binary fission, etc. One difference inducing, and regenerating powers of CAs. Neural CA also
is that solitons in these PSs do not possess strong individu- exploits the learnable nature of its NN architecture, and it re-
ality, hence almost always merge upon collision. mains unknown whether the Lenia model can be made learn-

It may be difficult to compare CAs and PSs because of able to achieve other goals.
a few fundamental differences in their rulesets - PSs calcu-
late the vector movements of every particle, and maintain a Future Works
conservation of mass, while CAs only keep track of scalar
states and the total mass is not conserved. To deal with this The following future works are proposed:
discrepancy, one may interpret the scalar states in CAs as • Automatic identify and count soliton individuals. This
concentrations of virtual molecules across a grid (see Molec- would allow the software to detect individuality, self-
ular level column in Table 1), and the molecules can be con- replication, birth rate and death rate, soliton interactions,
structed, destroyed or migrated with rates according to the etc., and hence select for these attributes using genetic al-
CA rule. The relationship between CAs and PSs would be gorithms.
like that of the macroscopic view of thermodynamics vs the
microscopic view of Newtonian physics. • Using “virtual eukaryotes” as elements, study the possi-
Relations to Artificial Intelligence bility of the next level of emergence and self-organization,

and compare the results to multicellularity, cell differenti-
There are efforts to employ methodologies from artifi- ation, cell signaling in biology.
cial intelligence to search for new artificial life patterns.
Reinke et al. (2019) used curiosity-based algorithm IMGEP • Develop Lenia into trainable Recurrent Residual Convo-
(Baranes and Oudeyer, 2013) and neural networks like lutional Networks or GANs for whatever purpose.
CPPN and VAE to explore the search space of the origi-
nal Lenia, with success in increasing the diversity in pattern
search. Interactive evolutionary computation (IEC) (Takagi, Supplementary Info
2001) and genetic algorithms (GA) were also used in semi- The open-source software of Lenia in Python is available at:
automatic discovery of new patterns (Chan, 2019). https://github.com/Chakazul/Lenia

On the other hand, a number of researchers have noticed
the close relation between CAs and neural networks (NN) Acknowledgements
(Wulff and Hertz, 1992; Gilpin, 2018). Mordvintsev et al.
(2020) designed Neural CA, a CA-NN hybrid that can be This work is dedicated to the late John H. Conway, inventor
trained to generate and regenerate (also playfully interpo- of the Game of Life, and the late Richard K. Guy, discoverer
late) predefined patterns. They suggested that the Neural of the “glider”, the first soliton in GoL.
CA could be named “Recurrent Residual Convolutional Net- I would like to thank Pierre-Yves Oudeyer and the Inria
works with ‘per-pixel’ Dropout”. Flowers team Chris Reinke, Mayalen Etcheverry, Clement

The architecture of our multi-channel Lenia also ap- Moulin-Frier for intellectual exchanges; Will Cavendish,
proaches a “Recurrent Residual Convolutional Network” Clément Hongler, Gloria Capano, Takaya Arita, Nick Ky-
(see Figure 2(d)). The “recurrent”, “convolutional”, and parissas, Michael Simkin, Michael Klachko, John Sherrill,
“residual” attributes come from the repetitive updates, the Alex Mordvintsev, Craig Reynolds for valuable discussions
convolution kernels, and the contributions from world states, and inspirations; Hector Zenil, Josh Bongard, Dennis Al-
respectively. The growth mapping is analogous to an activa- lison for opportunities in publications and university talk;
tion function. The incremental update part vaguely resem- David Ha, Lana Sinapayen, Sam Kriegman for continued
bles a fully connected layer in NN. supports in my road as an independent researcher.
